[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>Hi.
I'm Peter Russell,
and all my life
I've been fascinated by
science and the discoveries
it's making about the world.
But the one thing that science
hasn't been able to explain
is the very fact that
we are conscious,
that we each have an
inner world of experience.
It's easier to explain how
life evolved from simple cells
into human beings than it
is to explain why any of us
ever has a single
conscious thought.
And yet the very fact
that we are conscious,
is the one thing we cannot deny.
This is the great
mystery of consciousness.
Why do we have this capacity
for inner experience?
And it's not just human
beings that have it.
I often hear scientists say
that animals aren't conscious,
but is that really so?
When I see a dog lying
on the floor asleep
and its legs are twitching
and its nose is quivering,
I imagine it's dreaming.
And if it's dreaming, it
is having an experience.
And also, why else would
we bother giving our pets
anesthetics when we
operate if we didn't
believe they were conscious?
Why would we want to
make them unconscious?
The difference with human beings
is that we know that we know.
We are conscious that
we are conscious.
Now one way of thinking
about consciousness
is to liken it to the light
inside a film projector.
At the heart of the projector,
a source of white light.
And the light shines
through the film
and takes on the colors
and forms of the film,
and then an image
appears on the screen.
And what we're actually
seeing is just shaped light.
But we get so engrossed
in the movie, the stories,
the feelings we're
having-- the sadness,
the horror, the excitement--
that we forget it's all just
a form that light has taken on.
A similar process
happens in the mind.
All I ever actually
experience are the images
appearing in my consciousness.
But it doesn't seem that way.
When I see a tree,
it looks as if I'm
seeing the tree directly,
but science tells me
something completely
different is happening.
Light enters the eye where
it's absorbed by the retina,
and it triggers electrical
impulses which travel down
neural fibers to the brain.
The brain then analyzes
the data, and from that,
creates its own
picture of the world.
I then have the experience
of seeing a tree.
What I'm actually seeing
is not the tree itself,
but the image of a tree
that appears in my mind.
And this is true of
everything I experience.
Every sound, color, sensation,
taste, smell, memory,
thought-- they're all just
images appearing in my mind.
It's all forms the
consciousness is taking on.
But where does consciousness
itself come from?
This is the great mystery.
It may be that one day we'll
understand the brain so well,
that we know the exact
physical processes that
go on when we have the
experience of seeing a tree.
But even when we
do, the question
still remains of, why
is there consciousness
in the first place?
Why doesn't all this brain
activity go on in the dark?
This is what philosophers
call the hard problem
of consciousness.
How is it that
something as unconscious
as the matter of the brain can
ever give rise to something
as immaterial as an experience?
I think it's not
actually a hard problem,
so much as an
impossible problem.
Impossible within
the current paradigm.
In some ways, we're like
the medieval astronomers who
were locked into the
view that the earth was
the center of the universe
with the sun, moon,
and stars orbiting around it.
But there was a
problem with this view.
The planets did not move
smoothly through the sky.
They wandered back and forth
amongst the other stars.
The medieval astronomers
tried to explain
the peculiar movement
of the planets
with increasingly complex
systems of orbits,
but nothing seemed to work.
When Copernicus came
along and suggested
the earth might be
spinning around the sun,
no one took him seriously.
And when Galileo found
evidence to support Copernicus,
the bishops refused to
look through his telescope,
knowing it could not be true.
It was only a
hundred years later
when Sir Isaac
Newton did the math
and proved the new view was
correct, that the paradigm was
finally established.
Today, we're in a
similar position
regarding consciousness.
We are locked into the view that
consciousness itself is somehow
created by the brain, and
people have tried various ways
to explain this.
Something to do with the
processing over the brain
as a whole, something to do with
quantum effects inside nerve
cells.
But try as they may,
no one has succeeded
in explaining how any purely
material process could ever
give rise to an
experience in the mind.
We're rather like the
medieval astronomers
who never questioned
their basic assumptions.
And what is our basic
assumption today?
It is that matter
is not conscious,
that matter is totally devoid
of the capacity for experience.
An alternative
assumption, and one
that's being taken seriously
by a growing number of people,
is that the capacity
for experience
is present to some
degree in everything.
Awareness itself isn't something
that is created by the brain.
It doesn't suddenly appear,
as if by magic, out of nowhere
once a particular arrangement of
the nervous system has evolved.
The capacity for experience
is there all along.
Now this isn't actually
such a new idea.
We find it's a common theme
in Eastern philosophy.
Many Western philosophers
have explored it,
but it's never been taken
seriously by Western science.
What happens if we
do take it seriously?
It turns out it doesn't really
change anything in science.
Mathematics is still the same.
The laws of physics
all hold true.
Chemistry, biology--
everything we've
discovered there is the same.
What it changes is
our view of ourselves
and our place in the cosmos.
It puts consciousness right
back at the center of things.
In this view,
consciousness is not
limited to creatures
with nervous systems.
Even a simple bacterium has
a faint glimmer of awareness.
Nothing like the rich
experience we know.
Nothing like a
thought or a feeling,
perhaps just the faintest
sense of warmth or light.
If numbers could be
put to it, maybe a
billionth of human
consciousness, but not nothing
at all.
As life became
more complex, also
it's experience of the
world became more complex.
When it developed
sensory systems,
it was able to take in more
information from the world.
And then later as it
developed nervous systems,
it was able to process
that information
and get a better picture
of the world around
so the image that
appeared in consciousness
got richer and more detailed.
And then, with human
beings, evolution
took another step forward.
Because we not
only see the world
and hear the world in all
its incredible detail,
we can also think
about our experience.
We can reflect upon it.
And we can also then begin
to reflect upon ourselves
and the fact that
we are experiencing,
and we notice that
we are conscious.
We become conscious of
consciousness itself,
and this is the next great
step that we've made.
We have made the step
into self-awareness.
With self-awareness
came a sense of a self,
of an I that is aware.
But what exactly is the self?
This feeling of I that
we all know so well?
This is the second great
mystery of consciousness.
We use the word I
so much, you'd think
we knew what we meant by it.
But as soon as you try to
define this thing we call I,
you run into problems.
Who am I?
How do I define myself?
Peter Russell?
That's just my name.
A writer?
That's an activity from my past.
A man?
I have a male body, but
I can imagine myself
in a female body.
I might have different
perceptions, feelings,
and values, but the I that
has them would be the same.
It's that same sense of I that
has been there all my life.
What is this I that
is always there?
To know what the
self really is, we
need to carefully observe
our own consciousness.
This is the path that
many spiritual seekers
have explored.
They've looked deep
within their own mind,
trying to find the
essence of self,
and they all come
up the same answer.
There's nothing there.
No thing we can call the self.
This sense of a unique,
separate, individual self,
turns out to be an illusion.
Albeit, a very
convincing illusion.
This feeling we call I is just
the feeling of being conscious.
Many experience it as
simply a sense of being.
But because we don't normally
recognize that what we are
is this inner
quality of being, we
keep looking for something
we can call the self.
And so we dress
ourselves up in all
these psychological clothes--
things like the roles
we play in life, the way people
see us, the things we do,
our personality, our character.
But these are all
images of the self.
They're not the self
in its true essence.
It's almost like the opposite of
the emperor having no clothes.
In this case, there's
lots of clothes,
but no emperor underneath.
If we imagine ourselves
to the various ideas
we have of the self, then
our sense of identity
is always at the mercy
of events in the world.
If our circumstances
change, if our roles change,
if the way people
see us changes,
then our very sense of
identity can be thrown.
As a result of this, we spend
a lot of time and energy
trying to fend off
threats to our identity,
trying to bolster
our self-image,
buying things we don't really
need, trying to be someone.
On the other hand, when
we discover what we really
are, when we discover this sense
of being that's always there
underneath, there comes
a sense of liberation--
is the realization that we don't
need to do anything in order
to be anybody.
With that, the mind relaxes.
There's a sense of deep relief.
Underlying everything
we do in life,
everything we're looking for,
everything we're chasing,
there's one common desire,
one universal purpose.
That is, we want to feel better.
We want to feel more satisfied,
more fulfilled, more at ease.
None of us wants to be
in pain or suffering.
We want to avoid that if we can.
We all want to feel happy,
and have more joy in life.
What this ultimately means
is that what we're really
looking for is not things so
much as a better state of mind,
more satisfying state
of consciousness.
This is the mind's bottom line.
As the Dalai Lama put it,
"In the final analysis,
the hope of every person
is simply peace of mind."
There's nothing wrong with this.
It's completely natural.
Where we go wrong
is in the ways we
go about finding peace of mind.
>>Welcome to Beverly Hills.
You have arrived.
>>So we chase after wealth,
possession, fashion and fame,
in the hope that if we just got
enough, we'd finally be happy.
Sometimes we do find
what we're looking for,
and we do feel happy again.
But it's not a
happiness which lasts,
so we start looking
for something else
to make us feel better.
Many of us spend our
whole lives just looking.
Yet the truth is, it isn't
having the right things
or experiences that
makes us happy.
When we examine
our minds closely,
we find the very opposite.
When we think there's
something missing, something
we need in order to be happy,
we create for ourselves
a feeling of discontent.
This, I often think, is the
sad joke about human beings.
We're so busy worrying
about whether or not
we're going to be at
peace in the future,
we never allow ourselves to be
at peace in the present moment.
How can we be more
in the present?
In itself, it's quite simple.
It's just a matter of
relaxing the attention,
and opening our awareness
to what we're actually
experiencing.
Just noticing the
actual sensations
in your body-- flowing of the
breath, feeling in the hand.
Just noticing what is, as it
is, without thinking about it.
Our experience of the body is
always in the present moment.
It's our thinking about it that
takes us out of the present.
The mind's been so deeply
ingrained to think about what's
going on, that very easily
it jumps in and off again
on some train of thought.
When you realize
that has happened,
just simply relax the
attention again, and once more
become aware of what
is actually happening
in the present moment.
The practice itself is simple.
Like any other
practice, it's just
a matter of repeating the
process again and again.
Gradually, it gets
easier and easier.
The world's spiritual
traditions appear on the surface
to be very different.
They have different views
on the origin of life,
or our place in the universe, or
what happens to us when we die.
Some believe in a supreme being.
Some believe in many deities.
Others don't talk of God
at all, but they do have
some common underlying themes.
They all see that we get caught
in attitudes and beliefs that
don't serve us well, that
lead us to behave in ways that
are harmful to
others, and often, not
even in our own best interests.
Each spiritual tradition
seeks, in its own way--
some through prayer,
meditation, and devotion--
to open to the inner
world of the mind,
the world of the spirit.
They want to liberate
our souls, to free
our minds from self-centered
attitudes and materialist
attachments.
They are urging us to discover
who and what we really are.
In one way or another,
they are talking
about a shift in consciousness.
Consider what happens
when we find ourselves
stuck in a traffic jam.
The traffic jam only has the
power to stop the traffic.
It does not inject adrenaline
into your bloodstream.
If you're feeling upset, it's
because the voice in your head
is telling you that you're going
to be late, and if you're late,
bad things may happen.
You may miss the meeting.
You may be late home.
It's this that's
making you upset,
the fear that you will not be
happy sometime in the future.
Western science
has been remarkably
successful at explaining
the world around us,
but it hasn't given us meaning.
The world it describes
is a dry, material world
without any real purpose.
And science has also given us an
abundance of technologies which
we've used to satisfy many
of our needs and desires,
but again, it hasn't
given us values.
It doesn't tell us
the best way to use
this incredible
knowledge and power.
It also hasn't really
helped us develop inwardly.
If anything, it's
reinforced that sense
of self-centeredness.
We're probably more
full of ourselves today
than we've ever been.
I think what we need
today is an integration
of our scientific
understanding of the world
with the wisdom that's
held in the world's
spiritual traditions.
The origins of consciousness
may remain a mystery,
but how to awaken our
consciousness, how
to free ourselves from
misguided attitudes and values,
to discover who and
what we really are,
that is not a mystery.
That something that's been
explored by spiritual teachers
from around the
world-- people who've
got deep within their
own minds and discovered
the true nature
of consciousness--
and from that, how to live with
joy and love in their hearts.
And that's what we need today.
We need to rediscover
that wisdom for ourselves.
The next great frontier
is not outer space.
It's inner space, research into
the nature of consciousness
itself.
The one thing we all know for
sure, and the one thing we've
not yet explored.
[MUSIC PLAYING]